docs: add sudt script tutorial (#467)
nervosnetwork/docs.nervos.org: website/docs/script/sudt-script.mdx

---
id: sudt-script
title: "Tutorial: Simple UDT"
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import ScriptHeaders from "./ScriptHeaders.tsx";
import TutorialHeader from "@components/TutorialHeader";
import Tooltip from "@components/Tooltip";
import ScriptTools from "./_ScriptTools.mdx";

# Tutorial: Simple UDT Script

<TutorialHeader
  time={ScriptHeaders.sudt.time}
  topics={ScriptHeaders.sudt.topics}
  tools={ScriptHeaders.sudt.tools}
/>

User Defined Token(UDT) is a fungible token standard on CKB blockchain.

> In this tutorial, we will create a UDT Script which is a simplify version of [XUDT standard](/docs/common-scripts/xudt)

Reviewer: simplify -> simplified

to helps you gain better understanding of how fungible token works on CKB.

> It is highly recommend to go through the dApp tutorial [Create a Fungible Token](/docs/dapp/create-token) first before writing your own UDT Script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is highly recommended to go through the dApp tutorial [Create a Fungible Token](/docs/dapp/create-token) first before writing your own UDT Script.
```

├── contracts
│   └── sudt
│       ├── Cargo.toml
│       ├── Makefile
│       ├── README.md
│       └── src
│           └── main.rs
├── scripts
│   ├── find_clang
│   └── reproducible_build_docker
└── tests
    ├── Cargo.toml
    └── src
        ├── lib.rs
        └── tests.rs

7 directories, 12 files
```

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```

Here's a little introduction: `contracts/sudt/src/main.rs` contains the source code of the sudt Script, while `tests/tests.rs` provides unit tests for our Scripts. We will introduce the tests after we wrote the Script.

### Implement SUDT Script Logic

The sudt Script is implemented in [contracts/sudt/src/main.rs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/docs.nervos.org/tree/develop/examples/sudt-script/contracts/sudt/src/main.rs). This script is designed to manage the transfer of UDTs on the CKB blockchain.

Let's break down the high-level logic of how this script works:

1. **Owner Mode Check**: The script first checks if it is being executed in owner mode. This is important because if the script is running in owner mode, it means the owner has special permissions, and the script can return success immediately without further checks.

> 2. **Input and Output Amount Validation**: Next, the script collects the total amounts of UDTs from both input and output cells. It ensures that the total amount of UDTs being sent (outputs) does not exceed the amount being received (inputs). This is crucial for maintaining the integrity of the token transfers.

Reviewer: **2. Input and Output Amount Validation**: Next, the Script collects the total UDTs amounts from the input and output Cells to ensure that the UDTs being sent (outputs) do not exceed that being received (inputs). This is crucial for maintaining the integrity of token transfers.

        Ok(amount) => amount,
        Err(err) => return err as i8,
    };
    let outputs_amount = match collect_outputs_amount() {
        Ok(amount) => amount,
        Err(err) => return err as i8,
    };

    // Validate that inputs are greater than or equal to outputs
    if inputs_amount < outputs_amount {
        return Error::InvalidAmount as i8; // Error if invalid amount
    }

    0 // Success
}
```

3. **Error Handling**: The script also includes robust error handling. It defines a custom `Error` enum to manage various error conditions, such as when the input amount is invalid or when there are issues with encoding. This helps ensure that any problems are clearly communicated.

This implementation ensures that UDT transactions are validated correctly, maintaining the integrity of token transfers on the CKB blockchain. By checking both the owner mode and the amounts, the script helps prevent errors and ensures smooth operation.

### Collecting UDT Amount

In the sudt Script, the functions `collect_inputs_amount` and `collect_outputs_amount` play a crucial role in gathering the total amounts of UDTs from the respective input and output cells.

Here’s how they work:

> Both functions iterate through the relevant cells and collect the `cell_data` to calculate the total UDT amount. This is done using the following syscalls:

Reviewer 2: Both functions iterate through the relevant Cells and collect the `cell_data` to calculate the total UDT amount, done with the following syscalls:

- **`Source::GroupInput`**: This ensures that only the cells with the same script as the current running script are iterating
- **`Source::GroupOutput`**: Similarly, this syscall only the cells with the same script as the current running script are iterating

> By using these specific [sources](/docs/script/syscalls-for-script#source), the script avoids issues related to different UDT cell types, ensuring that only the appropriate cells are processed. This is particularly important in a blockchain environment where multiple UDTs may exist, and we want to ensure that the calculations are accurate and relevant to the current UDT Script.

Reviewer 2: By using these specific [sources](/docs/script/syscalls-for-script#source), the Script avoids issues related to different UDT Cell types, ensuring that only the appropriate Cells can be processed. This is particularly important in a blockchain environment where multiple UDTs may exist, to ensure accurate iteration of the relevant UDT Script.

Here’s a brief look at how these functions are implemented:

```rust
fn collect_inputs_amount() -> Result<u128, Error> {
    let mut buf = [0u8; UDT_AMOUNT_LEN];

    let udt_list = QueryIter::new(load_cell_data, Source::GroupInput)
        .map(|data| {
            if data.len() >= UDT_AMOUNT_LEN {
                buf.copy_from_slice(&data);
                Ok(u128::from_le_bytes(buf))
            } else {
                Err(Error::AmountEncoding)
            }
        })
        .collect::<Result<Vec<_>, Error>>()?;
    Ok(udt_list.into_iter().sum::<u128>())
}

fn collect_outputs_amount() -> Result<u128, Error> {
    let mut buf = [0u8; UDT_AMOUNT_LEN];

    let udt_list = QueryIter::new(load_cell_data, Source::GroupOutput)
        .map(|data| {
            if data.len() >= UDT_AMOUNT_LEN {
                buf.copy_from_slice(&data);
                Ok(u128::from_le_bytes(buf))
            } else {
                Err(Error::AmountEncoding)
            }
        })
        .collect::<Result<Vec<_>, Error>>()?;
    Ok(udt_list.into_iter().sum::<u128>())
}
```

> In summary, these functions are essential for accurately calculating the total UDT amounts involved in the transaction while ensuring that only the relevant cells are considered, thus maintaining the integrity of the UDT transfer process.

Reviewer 2: In summary, these functions are essential for the accurate calculation of the total UDT amounts involved in the transaction, while ensuring that only the relevant Cells are considered, thus maintaining the integrity of the UDT transfer process.

Full code: [contracts/sudt/src/main.rs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/docs.nervos.org/tree/develop/examples/sudt-script/contracts/sudt/src/main.rs)

### Writing Test For UDT Script

> Testing is a crucial part of developing any smart contract, including the sudt script.

Reviewer 2: Testing is a crucial part of developing any smart contract, including the sUDT Script.

Reviewer: smart contract -> Script?

The `test_transfer_sudt` test case is designed to simulate a transfer of UDTs from one address to another.

> It sets up the necessary environment, including creating input and output cells, and then invokes the sudt Script to perform the transfer.

Reviewer 2: It sets up the necessary environment, including creating input and output Cells, then invoking the sUDT Script to perform the transfer.

The test checks whether the transfer transaction is successfully verified.

> Here’s a code of the `transfer_sudt` test case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here’s the code for the `transfer_sudt` test case:
```

            .build(),
        input_token.to_le_bytes().to_vec().into(),
    );
    let input = CellInput::new_builder()
        .previous_output(input_out_point)
        .build();
    let outputs = vec![
        CellOutput::new_builder()
            .capacity(500u64.pack())
            .lock(lock_script.clone())
            .type_(Some(type_script.clone()).pack())
            .build(),
        CellOutput::new_builder()
            .capacity(500u64.pack())
            .lock(lock_script)
            .type_(Some(type_script).pack())
            .build(),
    ];

    let outputs_data = vec![
        Bytes::from(output_token1.to_le_bytes().to_vec()),
        Bytes::from(output_token2.to_le_bytes().to_vec()),
    ];

    // build transaction
    let tx = TransactionBuilder::default()
        .input(input)
        .outputs(outputs)
        .outputs_data(outputs_data.pack())
        .cell_dep(lock_script_dep)
        .cell_dep(type_script_dep)
        .build();
    let tx = context.complete_tx(tx);

    // run
    let cycles = context
        .verify_tx(&tx, 10_000_000)
        .expect("pass verification");
    println!("consume cycles: {}", cycles);
}
```

In this test case:

> - We deploy the sudt Script we wrote and use it to build cell's type script.

Reviewer 2: We deploy the sUDT Script we wrote and use it to build the Cell's Type Script.

- We set up the initial conditions by defining the valid input and output amounts.
- Finally, We build the full transaction and ensure that the transaction can be verified.

Notice that in the type script args we use a random bytes which is 42 indicating that we are not under the `owner_mode` in the `test_transfer_sudt` test case.

> For ownermode testcase, you can checkout the [full tests code](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/docs.nervos.org/tree/develop/examples/sudt-script/contracts/sudt/tests/src/tests.rs) for reference.

Reviewer 2: For owner mode test case, refer to the [full tests code](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/docs.nervos.org/tree/develop/examples/sudt-script/contracts/sudt/tests/src/tests.rs).

By writing tests like `test_transfer_sudt`, we can ensure that our sudt script behaves correctly under various scenarios, helping to catch any issues before deployment.

---

## Congratulations!

By following this tutorial so far, you have mastered how to write a simple UDT Script that brings fungible tokens to CKB.
Here's a quick recap:

- Use `offckb` and `ckb-script-templates` to init a Script project

> - Use `ckb_std` to leverage CKB syscalls `Source::GroupIuput`/`Source::GroupOutput` for performing relevant cells iteration.

Reviewer 2: - Use `ckb_std` to leverage CKB syscalls `Source::GroupIuput`/`Source::GroupOutput` for performing relevant Cell iteration.

    let udt_list = QueryIter::new(load_cell_data, Source::GroupOutput)
        .map(|data| {
            if data.len() >= UDT_AMOUNT_LEN {
                buf.copy_from_slice(&data);
                Ok(u128::from_le_bytes(buf))
            } else {
                Err(Error::AmountEncoding)
            }
        })
        .collect::<Result<Vec<_>, Error>>()?;
    Ok(udt_list.into_iter().sum::<u128>())
}
```

In summary, these functions are essential for the accurate calculation of the total UDT amounts involved in the transaction, while ensuring that only the relevant Cells are considered, thus maintaining the integrity of the UDT transfer process.

Full code: [contracts/sudt/src/main.rs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/docs.nervos.org/tree/develop/examples/sudt-script/contracts/sudt/src/main.rs)

### Write Tests for UDT Script

Testing is a crucial part of developing any smart contract, including the sUDT Script.
The `test_transfer_sudt` test case is designed to simulate a transfer of UDTs from one address to another.
It sets up the necessary environment, including creating input and output Cells, then invoking the sUDT Script to perform the transfer.

> The test checks whether the transfer transaction is successfully verified.

Author: ```suggestion
The TEST checks whether the transfer transaction is successfully verified.
```
